[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of "Gaiam Inspirations."
Have you had a hard time
finding a job lately?
Or have you maybe made a
mistake with an investment
or lost money lately?
Do you have issues
around money that you
would like the
opportunity to clear?
Well, this is what we're talking
about today, "The Law of Divine
Compensation," and joining me
to facilitate this conversation
is the wonderful spiritual
author, Marianne Williamson.
Thank you so much
for being here.
It's such an honor.
>>MARIANNE WILLIAMSON: Thank
you so much for having me.
>>LISA: So why do we
have issues around money?
What is that?
Is it a social conversation,
a societal conversation?
>>WILLIAMSON: Well, obviously,
our material survival
is important.
We need a home to live in.
We need to put money--
put food on the table,
not only for ourselves
but for children.
So we don't have to
apologize for the fact
that it's a topic that
everybody living in this world
has to deal with.
>>LISA: But is it something
that we identify ourselves with?
I mean, do we identify our
self-worth and how much
is that attached to our income?
>>WILLIAMSON: Well, I
think that certainly we
have financialized almost
everything in our society
in the last few decades.
I think there is a conversation
around prestige around money
that is perhaps inappropriate.
But that doesn't mean that
the larger conversation
is inappropriate.
We all have to make a living.
I also think for
men, when it comes
to losing a job,
losing all their money,
which you really
see in a recession
or a slow economic
recovery like now,
I think that there's
actually more
of a psychic crisis for men
than there is for women.
And I think women need to
probably appreciate that more.
A lot of self-worth
based on production.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
>>WILLIAMSON: And that's
a very serious topic.
It's not nothing.
>>LISA: No, no.
I'm really glad
you mentioned that,
because men have a certain
identity that women don't
usually have that are
gaining more and more,
but in a healthier
way, hopefully,
which is why you have
a book like this.
I have to ask you though about
the economic conversation.
And in the last decade, it
has been so intensified,
even in the last couple of
years about the 99% and the 1%.
I mean, there's so much
focus on this conversation.
>>WILLIAMSON: Well, it's an
appropriate focus actually.
What was really not very
healthy in the society
was that we were not
talking about it.
Because for several decades we
have been through tax policies
and through subsidies,
particularly
to large corporations,
we have followed
a line of development that's
been going on for quite awhile
now in which vast amounts
of material resource
of the country has been siphoned
into the hands of a relatively
very few.
And this has not only
created a crisis because
of the huge economic disparity
between that 1% and everyone
else, but it's also a
threat to democracy itself.
You know, the late Supreme
Court Justice, Louis Brandeis,
said you can either have large
amounts of money concentrated
in the hands of the very few,
or you can have democracy.
You cannot have both.
And there was something else
that went along with this.
Not only was it an
economic theory,
the whole idea that if you gave
more money, if you allowed more
money through reduced taxation
and so forth in the hands
of a very few, they would be
the so-called job creators.
Now, first of all,
this-- there's
no evidence that this
is actually ever worked.
But ideologically,
some of the people,
particularly like
during the Reagan era
who instigated that
kind of policy,
certainly were righteous people
who thought it was a good way
to stimulate the economy.
There were a lot
of not particularly
intended consequences to that.
But actually, even before that
there was an economist named,
Milton Friedman, and what
began to happen in the 1970s
is that we began--
companies began
to shift their sense of what
their responsibility was
towards its workers
and their community.
And this issue of what's
called shareholder value
became in vogue.
Now what that means
has very interesting
psychological and
philosophical implications,
because what they basically
said was that instead
of a company making
its business,
let's say that it make the
best computer in the world.
And then, what it would
be about with its workers
is we're going to make the
best-- I don't know if it was
at that time a computer, because
computers were just starting--
but we're going to make the
best machine in the world.
And then you had this
relationship with your workers.
You working together to
make the best machine.
>>LISA: Yeah.
A team.
>>WILLIAMSON: You
had a relationship
with your clients
that best-- OK.
When this shareholder
value became in vogue,
this was the idea
that no, no, no,
the most important thing is not
that you make the best machine.
The most important
thing is that you
make money for the
shareholders in the company.
Now the idea, you could
see the value of it.
In other words, the company
makes a machine and goes,
well, if our bottom
line is to make money
for the shareholders,
then we're not only
thinking about making the best
machine, we're thinking, well,
maybe we'll also
manufacture the widget
that will go with the machine.
However, look from a
philosophical and spiritual
basis what this did.
It threw the
universe off in terms
of the relationship between
the company and its workers.
Because instead of saying
we're working together
to make the best
machine, we're saying
we need your wages to
go down, because we
need to create more money
for the shareholders.
>>LISA: Or you'll lose your job.
>>WILLIAMSON: Yes, well, that's
when it's taken to the extreme,
absolutely.
So it threw off the
relationship, the righteous.
It threw off the universe
between the company
and its workers, between
the company and its clients.
And when taken to the
extreme, of course,
between the company
and the Earth,
because anything that
has to be hurt in order
to increase that bottom
line to shareholders,
and that began about the 1970s.
And it is thrown off
the moral universe.
When it comes to the
spiritual conversation,
that ethical center,
that issue that all
is to be right
with the universe,
that we are righteous,
right use of the mind.
Not only with a divine
creator, some higher
power with the universe
itself, with each other,
with our own hearts, and
our sense of integrity,
and with the Earth itself.
You mess with that and
nothing is ultimately
going to work
either in the house
in the life of the
individual or in the larger
economic picture for anybody.
>>LISA: It throws a cog
in the whole entire wheel.
>>WILLIAMSON: Absolutely.
Because it made money more
important than people,
more important than
life, more important--
>>LISA: Which is what
we're feeling now.
>>WILLIAMSON: We're
experiencing it big time now.
>>LISA: Losing jobs,
being laid off,
taking hits and cuts in pay
so that we could have jobs.
And so, say you are one of those
people, and you're watching,
and you've been applying
for a job for two,
three years and not
able to find anything.
So what can we
shift in ourselves
to turn that
conversation around?
We know it's happening
in the exterior,
and so that we don't
become victims to that.
>>WILLIAMSON: OK, well, first of
all it's not quite so separate,
because then I think
a lot of people
in the new thought,
new spirituality,
thinks that, well, what about
only in my individual life?
I think people are
waking up to the fact
that we do not
live in isolation.
And I think that the economic
crisis that has hit our society
has certainly made
that clear to people.
It's not just about you.
It's about the collective.
And a lot of the forces,
social and economic,
that affect the whole society
come home and hit you.
So that alone should
awaken all of us
from this sort of personally
isolationist stupor.
Well, I don't have anything
to do with politics.
I don't have anything
to do with that stuff.
I'm just trying to live my life.
Well, let me tell you, it's
going to come home to you.
Like the French say, if
you don't do politics,
politics will do you.
So what this book is about
is about the personal,
which is called
the microeconomic.
It's about the personal
relationship to money
and what you were saying,
what does one individual do?
Well, this is what, not only
the "Course of Miracles,"
but any metaphysical treatise
or teaching basically says.
It is a self-organizing
universe,
and these are the two
principles that guide this book.
It is a self-organizing
universe,
and it is a
self-correcting universe.
Now, number one,
self-organizing, the embryo
knows how to turn into a baby.
>>LISA: True.
>>WILLIAMSON: The acorn knows
how to turn into an oak tree.
The bud knows how to
turn into a blossom.
>>LISA: OK.
>>WILLIAMSON: Within
nature, it is obvious
that there is a natural
intelligence at work.
>>LISA: A self-organizing--
>>WILLIAMSON: Absolutely.
The cells know how to divide.
Now, it's not like-- We
seem to act, at least,
or we certainly seem to think
that all these little cells
came together and
knew how to form
a brain, and eyes, and skin,
and all this amazing stuff
of your body, but then we live
as though then you were born
and you're on your own.
But the spiritual
perspective is that not only
was that little egg
and sperm programmed
to become your physical body,
but that throughout all units
of time and space, even
after you were born,
even right this moment,
the universe is similarly
programmed to lift
you to the highest
level of creative manifestation.
You're programmed so
that your heart beats.
that your lungs breathe,
your liver works.
You're programmed
that your brain--
so the entire universe
in which you dwell
is similarly programmed.
Now, when it comes
to money and work,
no more no less
than anything else,
the universe is simply
programmed to thrive.
Now not only--
>>LISA: Really?
>>WILLIAMSON: Well, look at it.
I mean, we tend to
look at the world,
and we go, well, everything that
could go wrong could go wrong.
>>LISA: Well, there's poverty.
There's starvation.
>>WILLIAMSON: But that's
because of a lack of love,
so let's talk about that.
If-- from the ego's
thought system,
everything that can
go wrong goes wrong,
but from a spiritual
perspective,
the spiritual universe,
everything that can go right
goes right.
Now when you talk about poverty
and so forth, some people
might listen to what
I'm saying and go, what?
You're saying that
somebody who's
starving in Africa, the only
reason they don't have money
is because they
don't love enough?
No, that's not what
I'm saying at all.
I'm saying that people
who are starving in Africa
are starving because
we don't love enough.
There are one billion
people on this planet.
>>LISA: Collectively we don't?
>>WILLIAMSON: Well,
let's talk about it.
We have one billion
people on this planet who
live in what's
called deep poverty.
And that's $1.25 and less a day.
OK?
Now, we spend $700 billion
on military expenditures
in this country
alone every year.
Columbia University
economist, Jeffrey Sachs,
has estimated for $100
billion, $100 billion,
which is one-seventh of
our military expenditure
every year, we could
in association,
hopefully, with other
advanced nations
of the world, the advanced
industrialized nations,
we could within a
period of 10 years
eradicate deep poverty
from this planet.
17,000 children starve
on this Earth every day.
They starve, Lisa.
They starve every single day.
Not every year,
every single day.
Now if the advanced nations
of the world-- and this
is why I feel so strongly about
women owning our voices-- if we
said, no, that ends now, and
we simply collectively decided.
But this is what happens
when you have a society,
or civilization in this case,
where economic values rather
than humanitarian
values run the show.
If you made money the bottom
line rather than people
the bottom line.
>>LISA: See, what you're
saying is what I feel sometimes
when I donate to
an organization,
and I think in the
back of my head,
is that going to
make a difference?
When $700 billion is being
spent per year on other things,
is my $20 donation going
to make a difference?
>>WILLIAMSON: Well,
do you know the story
about the little boy
with the starfish?
>>LISA: Tell me.
>>WILLIAMSON: The story
goes that the little boy's
on the beach, and there
are all these starfish.
And he takes one starfish,
and he throws it back
into the ocean.
And somebody says to him,
honey, what difference
is it going to make to
all those other starfish.
There's so many starfish,
you can't possibly
throw all of them back.
He said, well, I
helped that one.
For that one it
made a difference.
But I want to go back
a little if I may,
because you were asking about
the one person who said,
but I don't have a job.
Or I have bills on my table,
foreclosure, whatever.
The universe is not only
in all of our lives.
This is completely
impersonal, no more or less
you or me, no more or less
money or anything else.
Not only is the
universe set up to lift
all things, the
spiritual universe,
to lift all things
to their highest,
the universe is not only
self-organizing in that way,
the universe is also
self-correcting.
So let's say my body.
Our bodies are set to
be healthy and to work.
If you cut your finger, the body
is also programmed to heal it.
>>LISA: To repair it.
Yes.
>>WILLIAMSON: So, the
universe is like a GPS.
If something goes wrong--
>>LISA: That's a good
way of looking at it.
>>WILLIAMSON: There
was a mistake made.
Maybe it was you who
made the mistake,
and you made a bad investment.
Maybe it was our politicians
who made a mistake,
or big corporations, somebody
did something loveless.
Because the "Course
in Miracles" says
miracles occur naturally
as expressions of love.
When they do not occur,
something has gone wrong.
Somebody thought and
did something loveless
that threw the universe.
It threw the miraculous
universe out of whack for you,
but the universe
is self-correcting.
It's like a GPS.
You took the wrong
turn, and so the GPS
recalibrates and immediately
creates a new route.
That's how the universe is.
In other words, if
you are bankrupt,
if you made a bad
investment, if you
don't have any money, if you
don't have any-- have bills
to pay or don't
have a job, the idea
is that in enlightenment--
the "Course in Miracles"
says you think you
have many problems.
You really only have one.
And that is your
separation from God.
God meaning love consciousness.
Meaning if I identify
with only my mortal being,
then I'm identifying
with a world of scarcity.
There are only so many
pieces of the pie.
And then my mind
goes, I'm a failure.
My parents were right.
I'll never amount to anything.
They're not hiring.
Even if they're hiring, they're
not hiring someone my age.
And it's this horrible
downward spiral.
>>LISA: Correct, yeah.
>>WILLIAMSON: If you identify
with the spiritual universe,
you realize, wait,
I dwell, and you
are at the effect of the
laws that rule the world
you identify with.
If you only identify
with the mortal,
you're at the effect of
the laws of scarcity.
If you identify
with the spirit, you
realize there's an infinite
number of possibilities
in any given instant,
and that the universe
has more than enough.
The universe has
already reprogrammed
the universal computer, so that
even if something has happened
in your life, it can
actually be transformed
into something better than ever.
And so it's always about
where you put your mind.
And this book is a guide
to putting your mind
in the place of
consciousness from whence
you will attract new
possibilities no matter
what has occurred.
>>LISA: Well, OK,
I'm going to grab
onto that when you said the
universe is self-correcting.
>>WILLIAMSON: Yes.
>>LISA: How do
you become a match
for that which in the
universe is self-correcting?
>>WILLIAMSON: You know, you said
something to me earlier today.
You said I have to get myself
to that vibrational frequency.
>>LISA: Right.
>>WILLIAMSON: So I
want to submit to you
a little something you
might want to look at there.
You don't have
to-- you are that.
>>LISA: No matter what?
If I'm angry?
>>WILLIAMSON: Well,
you, the real you,
is not angry is the point.
OK?
You don't have to
make yourself perfect.
Enlightenment is you have to
let go the imperfect thoughts.
So it's interesting
that you mention anger,
and you and I talked about
unforgiveness before.
As long as we dwell
in love, we don't
have to make ourselves
a vibrational match.
You are love.
Who you are is a
vibrational match.
>>LISA: I don't have to try?
>>WILLIAMSON: You
don't have to try.
Our vigilance has to
be I see my anger.
I see my harshness.
I see my lack of forgiveness.
I see my withhold.
I see where I'm not showing up.
I see where I'm focused
on the past or the future
rather than dwelling
fully in the present.
I see where I'm not giving
enough to an effort.
I see where I'm
stuck in self-pity.
I see where I'm whining.
I see where I'm
interpreting negatively.
Those things, that
we give up in order
to experience the love
that is who we truly are.
>>LISA: And you said in the book
that those feelings deactivate
the law of divine compensation.
>>WILLIAMSON: Exactly.
Every thought we think
either invites a miracle
or blocks a miracle.
>>LISA: Wow, think about that.
Whoo.
>>WILLIAMSON: So every thought
we think either attracts
the new opportunity--
>>LISA: That's interesting.
>>WILLIAMSON: Activates the
law of divine compensation.
>>LISA: Makes you choose
your thoughts very carefully.
>>WILLIAMSON: Or deactivates
the law of diving compensation.
That's why prayer and meditation
and disciplining the mind--
the word discipline comes from
the same root as disciple.
People would say, well,
what is my forgiving,
praying and meditating
have to do with money?
Everything.
Because it has to do with
who you are in any given
moment, which means will
people want to hire you,
will people want to
promote you, will people
see you as a
possibility of where
they want to go next
with their business?
>>LISA: And then, how much
are you living your story out
and playing the story
out in your conversations
around money?
There's a great
quote that we have
in the book that says,
"Spiritual growth involves
giving up the
stories of your past
so the universe can
give you new ones."
Or something like that.
That you can write a new one.
So that for-- what
you're talking about here
is to give that story up to
stop the victims or the stories.
I mean, the Madoff scandal,
all of that, it happened.
And it had happened
for a long time.
There's a lot going on.
We could just give
up that story.
I mean, that's not
easy, Marianne.
>>WILLIAMSON: Well, there are
two levels of things here.
First of all, most
people are not
going through economic crisis in
this country because of Bernie
Madoff.
We're going because of banks,
Wall Street, politicians,
and et cetera.
And some of that story
is very important,
because every American--
every generation
is a steward of
American democracy.
We don't want to
turn away from that
in the name of spirituality.
The story of how we got here
is important in the sense
of us making it right.
>>LISA: Accountability.
>>WILLIAMSON: Absolutely.
So spirituality does
not lessen our IQ.
What we want to give up
is the personal story
where we see ourselves
at the effect of that.
The poor me, the self pitying,
because you know that no matter
what is happening in
the world-- and the name
I'm giving to that aspect
of universal principle,
the law of divine compensation.
As the "Course in
Miracles" says there
is no order of
difficulty in miracles.
I was reading an article
about how many of the Fortune
500 companies were
founded during recessions.
>>LISA: I've heard
statistics around that.
Hewlett-Packard.
>>WILLIAMSON: So even
when there is a recession,
it's not that there's no money.
If that's the money's not
circulating the way it should.
It's not that somehow
there's less money.
There's less money circulating.
So you want to be lifted to
the vibrational frequency
where some of that's going
to circulate your way.
>>LISA: Aha.
Yes.
I'm getting a glimpse into it.
Though I really love
what you are saying here
is that there is a divine order.
As you say, the law
of divine compensation
exists in the universe.
"A Course of Miracles" says
that the formula for miracles
exists in the universe.
>>WILLIAMSON: It's the
handwriting of God.
>>LISA: Beautiful.
That's beautiful.
Marianne lectures at
a church locally here,
at a theater locally here.
Yeah, a theater,
and I want to show
you a video of
Marianne in action.
Just things come through
you that are so poignant.
They just give me chills
as I'm sitting here.
I want you to take a
look at that video.
>>WILLIAMSON: Thank you.
In every great religion,
and religious and spiritual
philosophy, there is
always this notion
of paradise, this idea
of some perfect place.
And the idea of
paradise is this idea
of some place
where we have been,
and we're a longing
to get back to.
Well, why would it be
this primal archetype?
Why would it be in
all the religions?
all the philosophies,
the idea of the promised
land, the idea of heaven,
this place we go to?
And, of course, it became
in traditional Christianity,
this idea of a place
we go to after we die.
But we don't go there
after we die physically
from an esoteric
perspective, we go there
after we die to who we are.
So the things of this
world can bring us
sort of temporary sursis
from existential pain.
But the real
happiness that we want
is the soul's longing for
that condition of paradise.
And the ego says, well, it will
be paradise when I have this,
or it will be paradise
when I have that.
And, of course, the
sad game of that
is that you get that,
and somehow it's
never quite all the things
you thought it would be.
That's because what we
really long for is paradise.
What we really long
for is the real world.
And the real world is that
which lies beyond this world
entirely.
As a matter of fact,
"A Course of Miracles"
says that the ascetic
who denies the world
is just making the flip
mistake of someone who
throws themselves into
the world too much.
Neither can find joy here.
The joy that we
all seek is found
when we appreciate
our presence here,
but we recognize
that the real world
lies beyond the
perceptual filter.
The perceptual filter
that is taught us
by the thought system
that dominates this world.
In "A Course of
Miracles," it says
that you did not
author yourself.
God authored you.
It's not something we
create, and to the extent
to which we think it is ours
to create to that extent,
we are off.
We have disconnected ourselves
with that which is our source.
And to the extent to which we
have disconnected ourselves
from that which is
our source, we're
not receiving the
energy which is
both the essence of who we are.
But also, you're not just a
particle, you're also a wave.
When you have an
authority problem,
it is always because you believe
you are the author of yourself
and project your
delusion onto others.
So that's the second mistake.
If I'm unclear
about who I really
am, not recognizing that I'm
an idea in the mind of God,
I will also be incorrect
in my assessment of you.
Because when I'm not in a very
clear fundamental understanding
of who I am and
where I came from,
not as something that is
up to me to decide, well,
who are you?
Decide who you want to be.
No, no, no.
When you realize you don't
decide who you want to be.
You realize who you already are.
If I'm disconnected from the
realization of who I am, then
by definition, I'm
not in my right mind.
And when I'm not
in my right mind,
I won't see you
as you truly are.
You then perceive
the situation as one
in which others are
literally fighting you
for your authorship.
So then I get into a
realm of consciousness
where I don't recognize
that you are one with me.
If I realized that
I am a child of God,
that I'm just an idea
in the mind of God,
then, and only then,
do I get to realize
that you are the same thing.
And on that realm, there is
no separation between us.
On that realm, there is
no competition between us.
If my energy is not coming
from love, compassion,
and forgiveness by whatever
name I give it, then
I am making a
world that will not
be happy for myself
and others by the way.
But, "A Course in
Miracles" says illusions
are as powerful in their
effects as is the truth.
So free will is that I can
think whatever I want to think.
It's like I can make my theme
that I'm a daughter of God,
or I could make my
theme something else.
But to the extent to which
I make it something else
as "A Course of Miracles"
says, the vision of one world
costs you the
vision of the other.
So when I get lost in the story
and in the manufactured made up
illusions of the world,
what are you going to be?
What's your brand?
What are you going to do?
What's your strategy?
How you gonna make it happen?
I, by definition, am
entering into a realm
where I'm always
going to be seeking
and I'm never going
to be finding.
Just as the Holy Spirit
speaks with your voice,
the ego speaks with
your voice, too.
But you kind of know when it's
the ego when the ego says,
got to do this, got to do that,
got to do this, got to do that.
It is more likely to be God when
it says just sit down, relax,
have some tea.
I'll tell you everything
you need to know.
Thank you very much.
>>LISA: What do you think
when you watch yourself talk?
I just see spirit
coming through you.
Do you recognize those
words as your own?
>>WILLIAMSON: No,
I'm a vain person.
I didn't like the
way the shirt looked.
People who work with me
know that we must never
play a tape for me.
We must never watch it.
>>LISA: But it's because you're
in the moment at that time
though, and you are
infused with conversations.
So about the law of
divine competition.
When you have anger
and resentment--
let's talk a little
bit more about that.
Does it cancel out
this wonderful law
that's existing in the universe.
>>WILLIAMSON: It deactivates it.
>>LISA: It deactivates it.
>>WILLIAMSON: It
deactivates it, but this
is where a book like
this is spiritual rather
than just mental.
A lot of times in life it's
not as simple as saying, OK,
I'll just think differently.
If somebody, lets say,
took $20,000 from you,
or if somebody you
were unfairly let
go of your job, or
somebody sabotaged you,
or somebody exploited
you, I mean,
it's not so easy as
just say, OK, I'll
think about it differently.
I won't be angry.
>>LISA: Oh, no.
>>WILLIAMSON: And that's where
God or some higher power,
as you understand God, comes in.
You say, I am angry, but
I'm willing not to be.
And that's where the
spiritual power comes in.
It's not as simple
sometimes as just saying,
think another thought.
If it was all that easy, we'd
all be enlightened masters.
>>LISA: I have to say, I
mean, coming from experience,
I can say that I'm going to
forgive but not right way,
because it hurts.
>>WILLIAMSON: Right.
>>LISA: It physically does.
>>WILLIAMSON: It's a
process, but you come to--
>>LISA: It takes a little bit.
>>WILLIAMSON: Of
course, it does,
and you come to realize you're
forgiving out of self-interest.
Because I can only have what
I'm willing to grant you.
So if once I realize that
my anger is not hurting you,
you're not even thinking
about this incident anymore,
but it's keeping the universe
from getting through to me,
because it can only come
through a conduit of love.
My anger and my unforgiveness
is not hurting you.
It's hurting me.
>>LISA: So essentially, that
universe is ready to provide.
It's ready to provide, and
it hits me, and it goes no.
>>WILLIAMSON: That's
exactly right.
Because every moment I'm either
open to love or my heart,
I have a wall in
front of my heart.
Why?
Because I have a wall in
front of my heart to you.
So if I have a lot in
front of my heart to you,
I have a wall in front
of my heart period,
because there is no separation.
So if I won't be an open
thing of love to you,
the universe can't
express its love for me.
Now, this is not
about pretending.
It's about saying,
I am so angry.
This triggers me
on such a level,
but dear God, I am
willing not to be,
and this is where we invite
spirit to come into our minds.
I surrender my anger.
>>LISA: You're a mother of five,
and you're working three jobs,
and you come home and you're
trying and you're upset.
You're angry about that.
How do you turn that into love?
How do you do that?
>>WILLIAMSON: Well,
you ask God's help.
You ask God's help.
You know, sometimes in the
spiritual conversation,
we infantilize people.
All the questions
come back, well,
how do people do it who are
having a hard time doing
it, rather than having a
conversation about people
who are working on doing it.
And more people understand this
when you talk to them about it
then you'd think from
listening to people
ask about how hard it
is for all these people.
Right?
The conversation
should be around what
about those who are
really working, right?
And I find that many of
the people I know who've
been the equivalent of
the mother of the five
who can't find a job are more
open than we might think.
>>LISA: Because they
want to make it work.
>>WILLIAMSON: So we infantilize.
I don't know why we do
that in this community,
but I hear that a lot.
What about the person
who finds it hard?
>>LISA: Well, you go to
the worst case scenario,
and then you work backwards.
But it's true.
What do most of the people say
that are in your lectures, that
are in your rooms,
that they come
to you, what are their
complaints about money?
>>WILLIAMSON: Well, exactly
what we're talking about.
But then if we're
talking about this,
they really often
will say, would you
like to say a prayer together?
This is the issue.
The universe works on the
level of cause and effect.
That's the law that
rules the universe.
In the East it's called karma.
In the West, it's
called cause and effect.
You can't ask the universe to
change the effect if you're not
willing to change the cause.
Your thinking is the
root cause of everything,
even if it's not what caused
the problem, your interpretation
of it and where you stand
within the circumstance
now will determine
whether or not
a miraculous
breakthrough now occurs.
So the issue has to do
with dear God, I am angry,
but I'm willing not to be.
And that's why I tell the
story in the book about a time
when I lost $10,000.
>>LISA: Wait, hold
that one thought.
I want you to come
back with that story.
We're going to
take a quick break.
When we come back,
we're going to hear more
about Marianne Williamson's
story and her incredible book,
"The Law of Divine
Compensation."
We'll be right back.
>>REGINA MEREDITH: Welcome,
to the next evolution
of Conscious Media Network.
Some of you have been with
us throughout our journey.
And now, as a result of our
partnership with GaiamTV.com,
we're able to reach
more independent,
progressive thinkers like you.
In addition to the hundreds
of interviews for CMN,
I'm now able to do twice as
many interviews each month
with the leading visionaries
and authors of our time.
This is possible because of
Gaiam TV's genuine commitment
to preserve and expand this kind
of groundbreaking information.
>>JOAN BORYSENKO: I have
a great deal of faith
that this universe
is a friendly place.
>>REGINA: In fact,
GaiamTV.com is
destined to become the largest
portal of conscious media
intended to awaken and inspire.
>>JEAN HOUSTON: We don't
just live in the universe,
the universe lives in us.
>>REGINA: I could not be
happier with this partnership
and the possibilities that
lie ahead for all of us.
>>DR. JOE DISPENZA:
Most people really
are thinking the same way
every day, acting the same way,
and feeling the same way,
but really hoping something
will show up differently in
their life, and it never does.
>>REGINA: Other well known faces
in the alternative media scene
will also be collaborating
with GaiamTV.com
to provide even
more perspectives.
>>RICHARD C. HOAGLAND:
Did the Mayans
understand about
hyperdimensional, torsion field
physics?
I think I can prove they did.
>>REGINA: In addition to my
live interviews from Gaiam TV
studios, Scott and I
will still be traveling
around the world for other
exclusive interviews.
>>HARVEY BIGELSEN: You've got
pharmaceutical commercials
telling you go to
see your doctor this,
go to tell your doctor that.
It's a brainwashing.
>>REGINA: Meanwhile,
I wanted to give you
a quick preview of
GaiamTV.com, so you
can see what's being
made available for you
as a result of this partnership.
>>MICHAEL TELLINGER: This
is in the late 1400s.
When they asked the
local African tribes who
built these structures, the
answer was we don't know.
Now, that is not what you'll
read in history books today.
I have a big problem with that.
>>REGINA: You'll find
curated consciousness
expanding films, thought
provoking documentaries,
engaging TV shows,
and much more.
Please join us for the next
evolution of conscious media.
>>LISA: Welcome back to
"Gaiam Inspirations."
I'm Lisa Garr, and my
guest is spiritual author,
Marianne Williamson.
She wrote a book called, "The
Law of Divine Compensation,"
one of her many books.
And so you were going
to tell us a story
before the break about
your story around this.
>>WILLIAMSON: It
was many years ago.
I think it was in the 1980s,
and I was lecturing here
weekly in Los Angeles.
And I decided to do
an evening of a mix
of spiritual conversation
and musical entertainment,
and I thought it
was a great idea.
And actually, it was great,
except marketing genius that I
was not, I decided not to
really tell people what it was.
I wanted to surprise
them once they got there,
so I would tell people-- the
dumbest idea-- I told people
in my lecture, you
really want to go,
but I didn't describe it.
I didn't know how to say, it's
going to be so incredible.
Right.
As a consequence, not all
that many people came,
and I had rented
this big theater.
And everybody who was
there said, oh, my God,
if I'd known how great it was,
I would have brought 10 people.
It just broke my heart.
So my father and mother
had flown in from Houston.
And my father comes backstage,
little sister, it was great.
And I burst into tears, and
I said, daddy, it was a bomb.
He said, what do you
mean it was a bomb?
I said, I lost $10,000.
His response to me was,
oh, hell, little sister.
First of all, he said,
I'm really proud of you
that you made $10,000
that you could risk.
He said and I'm proud of
you that you risked it
on something wonderful.
He said if somebody
gives you a problem,
you just tell them I
can absorb the loss.
You just tell them you
So in the days after that,
there was a friend of mine
who was in the show,
a woman named, Toni.
And Toni was,
because she loves me,
horrified that
I've lost $10,000,
and she kept going on and on.
Well, her upset would
only increase mine.
>>LISA: And make it worse.
>>WILLIAMSON: So I
would say to her, Toni,
I can absorb the loss.
Toni, I can absorb the loss.
So now whenever anything
like that would happen to me,
and any time I meet
somebody, you just declare,
"I can absorb the loss,"
because the universe can.
The first sentence in
"A Course in Miracles"
is that there is no order
of difficulty in miracles.
If it's a small hole, a
big hole in the ocean,
doesn't matter the shape of the
hole or the size of the hole,
the universe has enough water.
And that is the law of
divine compensation,
that even if there is material
lack or material diminishment,
there is, in the realm
of spiritual substance,
a capacity to compensate for
the lack or the diminishment
on the material plane.
That's the law of
divine compensation.
>>LISA: Is there a difference
between material wealth
and spiritual wealth?
In this context that
you're talking about here,
are you specifically
talking about money?
Or you're talking about wealth
of love, wealth of abundance,
those types of vague wealth?
>>WILLIAMSON: Well,
wealth of love,
love cannot be diminished
in the universe.
The only way love
can be diminished
in the universe
is if we ourselves
refuse to generate it.
So in the universe,
the whole point
is that on the spiritual
plane, there is no lack.
It's only on the material plane
that lack and diminishment
can show up.
So the universe is
set up for healing.
There could be
psychological wounding.
There can be emotional wounding.
>>LISA: Right.
>>WILLIAMSON: And even
then, because there
is no spot where
love is not, even
when we are psychologically
damaged or emotionally damaged,
they say time heals.
Situations heal.
We can be healed.
So the universe always
has a healing mechanism.
That's the point.
>>LISA: So then how do
you tap, I guess, into it?
Look about relationships, I
mean, so many relationships
that are devastated by finances.
Fighting about money, it really
takes apart a relationship.
>>WILLIAMSON: I think one of
the things that Americans need
to do is we need to put
our intimate relationships
in a sacred container.
I think we let-- It's like
if you have an intimate love,
and marriages
should be this way,
love affairs should be this
way, family should be this way,
you need to put it in
a psychic container.
And that's why families who
pray together stay together.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>WILLIAMSON: The Catholics
are right about that.
It's not just because there's
an injunction against divorce.
It's because you have to
decide what's important here,
and if you let things like
money-- money comes and goes.
And that's the whole idea of
for richer or for poorer, hello,
that our love will
not be based on this.
But too many Americans,
you have the TV on,
you have the salt of modernity.
That's why a Sabbath is
very important concept,
that one day of the week, we
will turn off the electronics,
and we will just
be with each other.
And if we do not
build, we do not
work at building this sacred
substance of our relationships
enough in order that
they are protected,
that's what spending
time together does.
Turning off the TV,
turning off the computers,
doing things together,
communicating
at a deep level,
parents, children.
>>LISA: Because in
the big picture,
it shouldn't matter what you--
>>WILLIAMSON: Well, I mean
it's a very stressful thing.
I mean, this is not
about denying that.
No, Susie, mommy and daddy can't
pay for your ballet classes
this year.
This is not like there's
no point minimizing it,
it's the point how
much mommy and daddy
are able to hold it that,
you know, Susie, guess what?
We're not going to do ballet
this year, but guess what?
We found this park
that we can all
go take free swing
dances this year.
Do you see what I'm saying?
It's what you-- how you can
emotionally and psychologically
compensate.
Because if the parents just
implode, then, of course,
the children will
just follow suit.
>>LISA: And, well, then
look at the relationship,
then, between the
parents, because any time
that they spend
together is spent
on financial
conversations and things
they can't do our buy
because of finances.
It would take the relationship
in a completely different
direction.
>>WILLIAMSON: And
that goes back to what
we were talking about earlier
about the psychic crisis
that it is for men more than for
women when they can't produce,
they can't support
their families.
This is not just a
material crisis for a man
much more than for a woman.
It's an emotional and
psychological crisis.
And that's why I
think it's important
that women understand
this and do everything
that we can to make sure that
the man-- the last thing he
needs is the emasculation
of feeling like his family
doesn't respect him.
>>LISA: That he can't provide.
>>WILLIAMSON: Yeah.
>>LISA: Yeah.
It's important.
>>WILLIAMSON: So there are
deep issues involved here.
>>LISA: Especially
with women making money
and being in the workforce,
and it not being a competition.
>>WILLIAMSON: Right.
>>LISA: And that's
something that's
very important is that if a
woman is working and bringing
in money, it shouldn't
demasculate a man.
But there's ways to
do it where you still
maintain the relationship
and be partners, and be
equals, and still
feel like you have
that wonderful-- a man
needs to feel in some way
that he is a protector
or in some way
the man in the relationship.
>>WILLIAMSON: I agree with that.
>>LISA: Yeah, I've
experienced that same thing,
and I have an amazing
relationship with my husband.
And he looks at that as I
don't rely on him to provide,
but I do not say you're
wrong for not doing
that so, therefore,
we have a totally
equal wonderful relationship
in terms of finances,
and it's not a problem.
And it's not a
competition, it's fun,
but it's also a
great conversation.
OK, so I'm reminded of
my mother-in-law who
is 75, lost her pension,
lost her savings
when a lot of things
change in terms
of the rules and
laws of finances.
She lost a lot of money there,
and she can't find a job now.
She's 75, "nobody
wants to hire me."
I get a lot of those
callers on my radio show.
What do I do if I am
older, and I'm not
hireable at this point in time?
>>WILLIAMSON: Well,
you know, I'm not
minimizing the problem
on a material plane,
but the universe is
infinitely malleable.
We don't believe in a God who
says, "I'd love to help you,
but you're over 75."
And you know, if the
whole universe is
run by a consciousness,
number one,
that we know we don't need
1,000 jobs, we need one.
And also, if the
entire society, it
used to be that parents came
in, lived with families more.
I mean, everything
relates to everything.
And in a society where old
people are so disposable,
and we sort of throw them
away, that's as big a problem.
So theoretically, when
everything works together,
the older person
doesn't have to fear
so much, because you take
care of your parents.
You take care of those who
years ago took care of you.
>>LISA: Yes.
In other countries it
is that way more so
than it is in this country.
We have a little bit
of that to get back to.
So there are some
incredible quotes
in the book that I
wanted to just share
with people, because you
have a way of bringing
things home that make it zing.
But this particular one
is about aligning yourself
with thoughts of infinite love.
And this is kind of the
how-to in my mind of getting
to that place, of that
vibrational match if you will
in the universe, of the
universe's ability to provide.
Can you explain that quote.
It's the "By aligning
yourself with thoughts
of infinite love for
yourself and others,
you gain dominion over the lower
thought forms of the world."
What do you mean by that?
>>WILLIAMSON: You
are at the effect
of the laws that
prevail within the world
that you identify with.
>>LISA: Oh, yeah, break
that down a little bit.
>>WILLIAMSON: OK.
If I identify with higher
thought forms of love,
I am standing my ground
in the spiritual universe,
because the
spiritual universe is
that which emanates from love.
And then I am
under the laws that
prevail within a
world that loves me,
and which is invested in my
higher good and the higher good
of all living things
past, present, and future.
It's counterintuitive,
but the way
to have effectiveness and
power within the material plane
is to know that you're
not of the material plane.
The material plane is ruled
by lower thought forms.
Thought forms of
fear, ain't it awful,
scarcity, doubt,
it'll never happen,
it's all gone to hell
in a hand basket.
>>LISA: Right.
>>WILLIAMSON: And if that's
the world you identify with,
then that will be your reality.
That's where spirituality
becomes so important.
Who are you?
We are mortal beings.
We are material
beings, but the point
is that we are so
much more than that.
This is like a precious,
priceless suit of clothes
that we're wearing.
That's what the body is,
but this is not who we are.
That's why enlightenment is
the answer to everything.
Enlightenment is the realization
that the birth of the body
was not the beginning,
it was the continuation.
The death of the body
will not be an end.
It's a continuation.
You and I are not trapped
here in our bodies.
We are part of a
larger order of things,
and it's just like when
Jesus said in the Sermon
on the Mount, "Did God not
cloth the lilies of the field?
Surely, he will
take care of you."
And there are objective,
discernible laws
of the internal
universe just as there
are objective, discernible
laws of the external universe.
If I drop this book, I know
that it will fall to the ground.
This is not because I
have faith in gravity.
It's because I understand
the laws of gravity.
And same with love.
If my heart is open,
miracles will happen.
>>LISA: That is a great example.
>>WILLIAMSON: And when
I close, it won't.
You know, it's like
with spiritual exercise
and you say how to, how to,
you do spiritual exercise
through prayer,
through meditation,
through spiritual practice.
It's no different than
physical exercise.
Because whether you're talking
about your physical muscles
or your attitudinal muscles,
after a certain age if you're
not working at keeping
them up, their headed down.
>>LISA: True.
>>WILLIAMSON: So you work
it, and it's like yoga, too.
Am I in the right position?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>WILLIAMSON: You're
working your body,
but it's your emotional body,
your psychological body,
your energetic body.
>>LISA: So what do you do?
What practices do you do?
>>WILLIAMSON:
Well, I'm a student
of "A Course of Miracles."
I also do transcendental
meditation.
But the most important thing,
so I do pray and meditate
every day, but the most
important thing is to work it.
When I'm triggered, if
somebody does something
and I could be angry
about it, forgiveness.
I always say my life
works pretty well when
I practice what I preach.
And when I don't
practice what I preach,
these are impersonal laws.
>>LISA: You see the
difference between the two.
>>WILLIAMSON: Yeah.
Oh, yeah, it's a
whole different me.
>>LISA: What is your
relationship with money?
>>WILLIAMSON: My
relationship with money
is that I'm very blessed
and privileged that I've
had some successful books.
Where my weaknesses have been
has been, particularly earlier
in my career, not
managing it well.
When I first made money back
when my first book came out,
I made a mistake that I think
many people make when they just
make money quickly.
I thought it was
more than it was,
because it was
more than I'd seen.
And I remember
receiving in my mind
that I shouldn't do anything.
And I can see now why
that was my guidance.
Be in this new situation and
grow energetically into it.
I should have
learned about money.
I should have grown
said, OK, I have money
that I've never had
before, make me worthy.
Now become responsible, mature--
>>LISA: Accountable.
>>WILLIAMSON: Accountable, sober
around it, emotionally sober.
And instead, I lived in
LA, got to buy a house.
And I can see where it took
me-- it was interesting
when that happened,
because I was spiritually
evolved enough to attract money,
but I wasn't psychologically
evolved enough to deal with
it well once it got here.
>>LISA: That actually
makes perfect sense.
That's that marriage between
spiritual and physical
where you create
it in one level,
but you have to be
practical about it.
You have to be.
>>WILLIAMSON: Well,
you have to embody.
You have to become the
person who is the container.
And so I've had my ups and downs
like everybody else has had.
>>LISA: And then how is
your relationship with it
now compared to then?
How did it change?
>>WILLIAMSON: My
ego mind sometimes
goes into, oh, I wish
that I'd been smarter back
in the 90s when my
first book came out.
Blah, blah, blah.
So it's one of those
when you say give up
your story so the universe
can write a new one,
I think, I like many, many
people look at the 90s,
and go, oh, my God, if only
I'd saved my money then.
>>LISA: Oh, yeah.
Oh, yeah.
Absolutely, well, I
mean, you could basically
read any page in your book
and just give yourself
a huge lesson.
>>WILLIAMSON: Thank you.
You teach what
you need to learn.
>>LISA: Exactly.
>>WILLIAMSON: So the book is the
sharing of what I have learned.
And in that book I talk about,
as I talk about in all my work,
I've learned, as I
think most people have,
as much from my failures
as my successes.
As much from where
I've gotten it
wrong as where I've
gotten it right.
And sometimes something
you learn through failure,
you learn the hard way
is almost a lesson more
powerfully learned.
>>LISA: That's why it's
good to write about it,
because then you get to share
your lessons with other people.
>>WILLIAMSON: Yeah, hopefully.
>>LISA: There's
another quote that I
think is really
powerful when you
talk about, "The universe
is the handwriting of God,
and is both self-organizing
and self-correcting,"
which we've been
talking a lot about.
"Where there is
lack, the universe
is already planning to remove
it from your circumstances."
Where there is
lack, the universe
is willing and ready to remove
it from your circumstances.
If we could just have
that in our minds,
if we could really
believe that, that's
what the entire law of
divine compensation is?
>>WILLIAMSON: "A
Course of Miracles"
says that whenever
there is a problem,
God creates the solution at
the moment the problem occurs.
The Native American
Indians used to say
that if there is a
poison in the forest,
the antidote to the poison is
within a certain number of feet
away.
And so when you live from
a spiritual perspective,
you know if there's a problem,
the answer is probably closer
than I think.
One of the areas where
I've seen this in my life,
where I can see all
the times when I just--
do you ever realize
you made a mistake,
you didn't take advantage
of an opportunity,
you went the wrong way, and
you look back in retrospect
and you think,
everything I needed
was right in front of me.
>>LISA: Oh, yes.
>>WILLIAMSON: Everybody
I needed to talk
to was right in front of me.
You know, there's a man named
Mike Dugan who wrote a play.
And there's a line in the
play, "I laughed at the people
I should have listened to.
And I listened to the people
I should have laughed at."
And I think this is true
with money and business
as much as anything.
You're in front of me.
You're my friend, but I'm
assuming you don't know.
I'm going to go get some fancy
person who I think might know.
And you look back
and you realize
the universe had put
right in front of me
the person who had the
insight that I needed.
But when you don't realize it's
a self-organizing universe,
you think it must
be somewhere else.
I have to go find a job.
That's like another issue
there that I talk about
in the book is the difference
between a job and a calling.
People are out looking for
jobs, like it's out there
and I've got to find it.
But with a career
and a calling, you
realize there's something
that organically unfolds
from the field of
your own being.
You give birth to it.
There's that story, and most
of us have experienced this,
we've been one character
in the scenario or another.
Let's say there's a
man named William,
and William has a business idea.
And he feels absolutely
sure if he could only
talk to John Kerrigan.
I know John Kerrigan
would like my idea,
and John Kerrigan
is a huge investor.
I just know if I could
talk to John Kerrigan.
So he's going to a
party, and you probably
know where I'm going with this.
So William is going to a
party, and he has heard a rumor
that John Kerrigan
is going to be there.
So he's talking to people,
but he's really not
even talking to them.
He's looking past them to
see if maybe John Kerrigan--
you know how someone's
really looking past you
for somebody more interesting.
So William is talking to this
nice little old lady, right?
And John Kerrigan's
mind has, who is she
and what can she do for me?
And she's saying, well, tell
me about yourself young man.
Oh, I'm just here
ma'am, like he's
treating her like she's nothing.
Well, you know where
this story is going.
Later in the evening,
somebody says to William,
I saw you talking to
John Kerringan's mother.
Was she a nice woman?
And this woman had
tried to talk to him
and engage him in conversation.
So the universe
had brought to him
the best conduit by which
to get to John Kerrigan.
But number one, he didn't
realize the universe
is self-organizing,
so you should
be alert to
whatever's happening.
And number two, his heart
wasn't open to the human being
who is in front of him.
>>LISA: So the miracle
just, it went away,
and it wasn't in here.
It wasn't inside here.
It was out there and
reaching, and planning,
and going into action.
>>WILLIAMSON: As opposed to
knowing the universe is on it.
>>LISA: Well, I
do know where you
can get into that trap
of wanting to go out
after the goal, and you set it
into motion and all that stuff,
and then you realize
once you just give up--
and it's not giving up.
You use a specific word in
the book-- surrendering.
>>WILLIAMSON: You know the
"Course of Miracles" says,
liberation is not bursting
out but a gentle melting in.
You know when the
embryo becomes the baby,
the acorn becomes the oak tree,
the bud becomes the blossom,
you and I are
similarly programmed
to become the highest
best version of ourselves.
The universe is invested
in our self-actualization.
And the perfect career and
abundance is just part of that.
Now the difference between
us, and the embryo, the acorn,
and the bud is
that we can say no.
We can say, no, I don't want to.
>>LISA: Those active
minds of ours.
>>WILLIAMSON: They can't.
Pardon?
>>LISA: That's right.
They can't.
>>WILLIAMSON: They can't.
>>LISA: They cannot say no to
the self-organizing universe.
>>WILLIAMSON: Right,
and you and I can.
>>LISA: And we can and we do.
>>WILLIAMSON: And not
only is it that God's plan
of the universe's plan works,
it's that ours doesn't.
So like that story of
William, he actually
interfered with the plan.
The plan was bringing everything
to him that he needed,
but he interfered by
having his own plan.
>>LISA: Self-limiting
thoughts, belief
that you can't do it,
that there's scarcity.
>>WILLIAMSON: That other
people don't matter.
>>LISA: Or that--
>>WILLIAMSON: That
love and forgiveness
has nothing to do with this.
>>LISA: Or that
the wrong person is
going to mess me over, and screw
me over, and all that, yes.
Those fear, like those
limiting thoughts.
>>WILLIAMSON: And
savvy, yes, wise, yes.
>>LISA: So what
is a good practice
when those thoughts come up?
If you're watching
this interview,
and you're getting
this, and you're
right here with us, what happens
when you come up against that,
OK, here's one of the
limiting thoughts,
what do I do with this?
>>WILLIAMSON: Well, if you've
meditated in the morning,
it won't come up so much.
>>LISA: OK.
So good step.
>>WILLIAMSON: Every
great religious
and spiritual tradition
that I've ever
read about emphasizes the
importance of the morning.
We wake up in the
morning, we take a shower.
You don't want yesterday's
dirt with you on your body
as you go into the day.
>>LISA: Right.
>>WILLIAMSON: But if
we don't meditate,
we're taking yesterday's
stress into the day.
So why would you be so careful
to wash your body but not
your mind and your
consciousness?
And that's why we
want to meditate.
Meditating in the morning,
praying in the morning,
centering ourselves
in right relationship
to the universe,
or the chances--
and then you know
what Americans do,
then we turn on the
TV, or the computer.
So not only are you
carrying your own stress,
you're carrying the stress
of everybody in Syria,
and the economy, and Somalia
and every place else.
So the idea of prayer and
meditation in the morning
is so that there will not
be as many frantic moments
where we would be vulnerable
to our own reactiveness
and our own impulsivity.
And if we are feeling ourselves,
I'm going insane right now.
I'm not being my truest self.
We have a practice by which to
say dear God, please help me.
I need help.
I know I shouldn't
be feeling this way,
but I really am, and
please protect me.
Otherwise, I might
push that send button,
I might send a text I'll regret
for of the rest of my life.
I might send an
email that will not
be a good email to
have in writing.
>>LISA: Just be aware of it.
>>WILLIAMSON: But
it's real difficult
if you haven't centered
yourself in spiritual practice
in the morning.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
Absolutely.
Marianne has a great
clip about the book.
She's actually reading
some of the great quotes
because there's so
many gems in this book.
Take a look at this.
>>WILLIAMSON: Hi, I am
Marianne Williamson,
and I have a new book.
And it's called "The Law
of Divine Compensation."
In this book I take spiritual
principles and miracle minded
thinking, and I apply
them very specifically
to issues about work,
and money, and career.
Here's a little
bit from the book.
"When we think of
ourselves as channels
for the infinite creative
energy of the universe,
we think higher thoughts
than how will I get a job.
We're lifted to a
realm of consciousness
where questions like,
how can I best serve
the world take precedence over
what can I get out of this?
Within that realm, we
naturally do get a job.
We naturally do create
money, and we naturally
do produce an outer
prosperity that
reflects the prosperity
in our hearts.
This doesn't mean we don't
have to do the footwork,
but our feet become guided
by a wisdom we might not
have even known we had."
The idea I'm dealing
with here is the idea
that the universe is
both self-organizing and
self-correcting.
We are meant to prosper.
We are meant to be
lifted to the highest
level of creative possibility
in every area of our lives.
And "The Law of
Divine Compensation"
refers to the idea
that even when
we experience diminishment
within the material plane,
within the level of
spiritual substance,
there is more than enough
capacity for the universe
to compensate for any lack.
If those ideas seem
interesting to you,
I hope that you will
pick up the book.
And I hope that
you will not only
read it, but apply
the principles
and have all of the miracles
that I'm sure you desire.
We all do.
Thanks.
>>LISA: I remember your
book, "A Return to Love"
and you basically rewrote
"A Course of Miracles"
so that we could understand it.
How long have you been studying
"A Course of Miracles?"
>>WILLIAMSON: Well, yes,
"The Return to Love"
is like the cliff notes version.
I've been studying the
"Course of Miracles"
since 1970s, mid-70s
somewhere, like maybe
'77, something like that.
And I started lecturing
about it in 1983.
>>LISA: Just give
a brief description
of what "A Course
of Miracles" is.
>>WILLIAMSON: The course
has been described
as a self-study program of
spiritual psychotherapy.
It is a training in
relinquishing a thought system
based on fear, and
accepting, instead,
a thought system based on love.
So in that sense, it's
a course in forgiveness.
And the goal of the course is
the attainment of inner peace.
>>LISA: Many people
treat it like the Bible,
like their own
version of the Bible
where they listen to quotes.
They read it over
and over again,
apply it to different areas.
And as you have throughout
the show, taken these--
I wrote one down, "A shift
in thinking from fear to love
is the miracle."
>>WILLIAMSON: Yes, the course
says a shift in perception
from fear to love.
Because since thought
is the level of cause,
if you want your life
to change, if you
want the movie to change, you
can't just go up to the screen
and try to change the plot.
What we experience out
there is the effect
of what we're thinking.
So if you want a miracle out
there, you shift your thinking.
>>LISA: So the
love is the cause,
and the reaction is the effect?
>>WILLIAMSON: Right.
>>LISA: But you have to
shift to that place in love
for the difference to come in.
>>WILLIAMSON: And
love casts out fear
the same way light
casts out darkness.
You can't fight the darkness,
you just turn on the light.
You can't fight the fear.
We tend to think if
I analyze the fear,
people say how do I
move past the fear?
The only way to
move past the fear
is to move towards the love.
>>LISA: Ohh, that's good.
In order to move
past the darkness,
is to move towards the light.
>>WILLIAMSON: It's the only way.
You can hit darkness
with a baseball bat.
So with career, for instance,
that you see your work
as an act of love.
It's a ministry, it's a calling.
A calling with permanent
employment given you by God
the moment you were born.
That job, can't be fired, is
to be the most loving you,
and the work that you
do-- you're an artist,
you're a salesperson,
you're a businessperson,
you're a scientist.
No, it's all just the
form, the content of which
is the love that you
are giving to the world.
People might say, well,
that sounds-- whatever.
>>LISA: No, it sounds wonderful.
It sounds beautiful, and
it's Marianne Williamson.
And I just thank you so much.
>>WILLIAMSON: Thank you so much.
>>LISA: Thank you.
You were wonderful, and it's
so great to have you in person.
>>WILLIAMSON: Thank
you for having me on.
>>LISA: If you would like to
watch a replay of my interview
with Marianne Williamson, or
share it with your friends,
go to GaiamTV.com.
And there's a lot more
thought provoking interviews
there, transformational
films, go to GaiamTV.com
for your free trial today.
[MUSIC PLAYING]